Chapter 3   The Google Cloud SDK and Web CLI


Setting Up an Account on Google Cloud Platform
This section shows how to set up an account on Google Cloud Platform. A GCP account
gives access to all of the platform’s products and services. For a new account, a $300
credit is awarded to be spent over a period of 12 months. This offer is great as it gives
ample time to explore the different features and services of Google’s cloud offering.
    Note that a valid credit card is required to register an account to validate that it is an
authentic user, as opposed to a robot. However, the credit card won’t be charged after
the trial ends, except Google is authorized to do so:

      1. Go to https://cloud.google.com/ to open an account (see
         Figure 3-1).




Figure 3-1. Google Cloud Platform login page

      2. Fill in the necessary identity, address, and credit card details.

      3. Wait a moment while an account is created on the platform (see
         Figure 3-2).



12
                                          Chapter 3   The Google Cloud SDK and Web CLI




Figure 3-2. Creating account

     4. After account creation, we’re presented with the Welcome to GCP
        page (see Figure 3-­3).




Figure 3-3. Welcome to GCP




                                                                                   13
Chapter 3   The Google Cloud SDK and Web CLI

      5. Click the icon of three lines in the top-left corner of the page
         (marked with a circle in Figure 3-3), then click Home (marked
         with a rectangle in Figure 3-3) to open the Google Cloud Platform
         dashboard (Figure 3-4).




Figure 3-4. GCP dashboard

    The Cloud dashboard provides a bird’s-eye summary of the project such as the
current billing rate and other resource usage statistics. The activity tab to the right gives
a breakdown of the resource actions performed on the account. This feature is useful
when building an audit trail of events.



GCP Resources: Projects
All the services and features of the Google Cloud Platform are called resources. These
resources are arranged in a hierarchical order, with the top level being the project.
The project is like a container that houses all GCP resources. Billing on an account is
attached to a project. Multiple projects can be created for an account. A project must be
created before working with GCP.
14
