                                                                         CHAPTER 1
                          Introduction to Deep Learning




Deep learning has revolutionized the technology industry. Modern machine transla‐
tion, search engines, and computer assistants are all powered by deep learning. This
trend will only continue as deep learning expands its reach into robotics, pharma‐
ceuticals, energy, and all other fields of contemporary technology. It is rapidly becom‐
ing essential for the modern software professional to develop a working knowledge of
the principles of deep learning.
In this chapter, we will introduce you to the history of deep learning, and to the
broader impact deep learning has had on the research and commercial communities.
We will next cover some of the most famous applications of deep learning. This will
include both prominent machine learning architectures and fundamental deep learn‐
ing primitives. We will end by giving a brief perspective of where deep learning is
heading over the next few years before we dive into TensorFlow in the next few
chapters.

Machine Learning Eats Computer Science
Until recently, software engineers went to school to learn a number of basic algo‐
rithms (graph search, sorting, database queries, and so on). After school, these engi‐
neers would go out into the real world to apply these algorithms to systems. Most of
today’s digital economy is built on intricate chains of basic algorithms laboriously
glued together by generations of engineers. Most of these systems are not capable of
adapting. All configurations and reconfigurations have to be performed by highly
trained engineers, rendering systems brittle.
Machine learning promises to change the field of software development by enabling
systems to adapt dynamically. Deployed machine learning systems are capable of
learning desired behaviors from databases of examples. Furthermore, such systems


                                                                                       1
