CHAPTER 14



Principles of Learning
Machine learning is, for the most part, sub-divided into three components based on the
approach to the learning problem. The three predominant categories of learning are the
supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning schemes. In this chapter, we will
go over supervised learning schemes in detail and also touch upon unsupervised and
reinforcement learning schemes to a lesser extent.
    The focus on supervised learning is for a variety of reasons. Firstly, they are the
predominant techniques used for building machine learning products in industry;
secondly, as you will soon learn, they are easy to ground truth and assess their
performances before being deployed as part of a large-scale production pipeline. Let’s
examine each of the three schemes.



S
 upervised Learning
To easily understand the concept of supervised learning, let’s revisit the problem of
identifying spam emails from a set of emails. We will use this example to understand
key concepts that are central to the definition and the framing of a supervised learning
problem, and they are

       •    Features

       •    Samples

       •    Targets

     For this contrived example, let’s assume that we have a dictionary of the top 4 words
in the set of emails and we record the frequency of occurrence for each email sample.
This information is represented in a tabular format, where each feature is a column and
the rows are email samples. This tabular representation is called a dataset. Figure 14-1
illustrates this depiction.

                                                                                          171
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_14
Chapter 14   Principles of Learning




Figure 14-1. Dataset representation

     The fundamental concept behind supervised machine learning is that each sample
is associated with a target variable, and the goal is to teach the computer to learn the
patterns from the dataset features that results in a target as a prediction outcome. The
columns of a dataset in machine learning are referred to as features; other names you
may find commonly used are variables or attributes of the dataset, but in this book, we
will use the term features to describe the measurement units of a data sample. Moreover,
the samples of a dataset are also referred to as rows, data points, or observations, but we
will use the term samples throughout this book.
     Hence, in supervised learning, a set of features are used to build a learning model
that will predict the outcome of a target variable as shown in Figure 14-1.
     Next, we will cover important modeling considerations for building supervised
learning models.


Regression vs. Classification
In supervised learning, we typically have two types of modeling task, and they are
regression and classification.

172
