Chapter 27   What Is Deep Learning?


I nspiration from the Brain
Scientists often look to nature for inspiration when performing incredible feats. Notably,
the birds inspired the airplane. In that vein, there is no better type to study as an antitype
of intelligence as the human brain.
     We can view the brain as a society of intelligent agents that are networked together
and communicate by passing information via electrical signals from one agent to
another. These agents are known as neurons. Our principal interest here is to have a
glimpse of what neurons are, what their components are, and how they pass information
around to create intelligence.
     A neuron is an autonomous agent in the brain and is a central part of the nervous
system. Neurons are responsible for receiving and transmitting information to other cells
within the body based on external or internal stimuli. Neurons react by firing electrical
impulses generated at the stimuli source to the brain and other cells for the appropriate
response. The intricate and coordinated workings of neurons are central to human
intelligence.
     The following are the three most essential components of neurons that are of
primary interest to us:

      •   The axon

      •   The dendrite

      •   The synapse

    The axon is a long tail connected to the nucleus of the neuron as seen in
Figure 27-­1. The axon is responsible for transmitting electrical signals from the
nucleus to other neuron cells through the axon terminals. The dendrite, on the other
hand, receives information as electrical impulses from other neuron cells through
the synapses to the nucleus of a neuron cell.




328
                                                        Chapter 27   What Is Deep Learning?




Figure 27-1. A neuron

    By mimicking these three biological components of a neuron, scientists developed
the core design and structure of an artificial neural network (ANN) that allows us to build
machines that can learn. We will discuss the ANN in more detail in the next chapter.
There is much hope that if we can mimic the capabilities of the brain from a science and
engineering perspective, we can build machines that can learn hierarchical features
from complex domain use cases.
    This chapter introduces the field of deep learning as an engineering impersonation
of how the brain learns to build artificial neural networks. In the next chapter, we’ll go
deeper to discuss the neural network algorithm.




                                                                                       329
CHAPTER 28



Neural Network
Foundations
Building on the inspiration of the biological neuron, the artificial neural network
(ANN) is a society of connectionist agents that learn and transfer information from
one artificial neuron to the other. As data transfers between neurons, a hierarchy
of representations or a hierarchy of features is learned, hence the name deep
representation learning or deep learning.



T he Architecture
An artificial neural network is composed of

       •    An input layer

       •    Hidden layer(s)

       •    An output layer




                                                                                          331
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_28
