                                                                       Preface




This book will introduce you to the fundamentals of machine learning through Ten‐
sorFlow. TensorFlow is Google’s new software library for deep learning that makes it
straightforward for engineers to design and deploy sophisticated deep learning archi‐
tectures. You will learn how to use TensorFlow to build systems capable of detecting
objects in images, understanding human text, and predicting the properties of poten‐
tial medicines. Furthermore, you will gain an intuitive understanding of TensorFlow’s
potential as a system for performing tensor calculus and will learn how to use Tensor‐
Flow for tasks outside the traditional purview of machine learning.
Importantly, TensorFlow for Deep Learning is one of the first deep learning books
written for practitioners. It teaches fundamental concepts through practical examples
and builds understanding of machine learning foundations from the ground up. The
target audience for this book is practicing developers, who are comfortable with
designing software systems, but not necessarily with creating learning systems. At
times we use some basic linear algebra and calculus, but we will review all necessary
fundamentals. We also anticipate that our book will prove useful for scientists and
other professionals who are comfortable with scripting, but not necessarily with
designing learning algorithms.

Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
     Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width
    Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program ele‐
    ments such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment
    variables, statements, and keywords.



                                                                                    ix
Constant width bold
        Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic
        Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values deter‐
        mined by context.

                   This element signifies a tip or suggestion.




                   This element signifies a general note.




                   This element indicates a warning or caution.




Using Code Examples
Supplemental material (code examples, exercises, etc.) is available for download at
https://github.com/matroid/dlwithtf.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example code is offered
with this book, you may use it in your programs and documentation. You do not
need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of
the code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this
book does not require permission. Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples
from O’Reilly books does require permission. Answering a question by citing this
book and quoting example code does not require permission. Incorporating a signifi‐
cant amount of example code from this book into your product’s documentation does
require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually includes the
title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “TensorFlow for Deep Learning by
Bharath Ramsundar and Reza Bosagh Zadeh (O’Reilly). Copyright 2018 Reza Zadeh,
Bharath Ramsundar, 978-1-491-98045-3.”




x   |    Preface
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given
above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.

O’Reilly Safari
                        Safari (formerly Safari Books Online) is a membership-based
                        training and reference platform for enterprise, government,
                        educators, and individuals.

Members have access to thousands of books, training videos, Learning Paths, interac‐
tive tutorials, and curated playlists from over 250 publishers, including O’Reilly
Media, Harvard Business Review, Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-Wesley Profes‐
sional, Microsoft Press, Sams, Que, Peachpit Press, Adobe, Focal Press, Cisco Press,
John Wiley & Sons, Syngress, Morgan Kaufmann, IBM Redbooks, Packt, Adobe
Press, FT Press, Apress, Manning, New Riders, McGraw-Hill, Jones & Bartlett, and
Course Technology, among others.
For more information, please visit http://oreilly.com/safari.

How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:

    O’Reilly Media, Inc.
    1005 Gravenstein Highway North
    Sebastopol, CA 95472
    800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
    707-829-0515 (international or local)
    707-829-0104 (fax)

We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at http://bit.ly/tensorflowForDeepLearning.
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to bookques‐
tions@oreilly.com.
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and news, see our web‐
site at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia



                                                                        Preface   |   xi
Acknowledgments
Bharath is thankful to his PhD advisor for letting him work on this book during his
nights and weekends, and especially thankful to his family for their unstinting sup‐
port during the entire process.
Reza is thankful to the open source communities on which much of software and
computer science is based. Open source software is one of the largest concentrations
of human knowledge ever created, and this book would have been impossible without
the entire community behind it.




xii   |   Preface
                                                                         CHAPTER 1
                          Introduction to Deep Learning




Deep learning has revolutionized the technology industry. Modern machine transla‐
tion, search engines, and computer assistants are all powered by deep learning. This
trend will only continue as deep learning expands its reach into robotics, pharma‐
ceuticals, energy, and all other fields of contemporary technology. It is rapidly becom‐
ing essential for the modern software professional to develop a working knowledge of
the principles of deep learning.
In this chapter, we will introduce you to the history of deep learning, and to the
broader impact deep learning has had on the research and commercial communities.
We will next cover some of the most famous applications of deep learning. This will
include both prominent machine learning architectures and fundamental deep learn‐
ing primitives. We will end by giving a brief perspective of where deep learning is
heading over the next few years before we dive into TensorFlow in the next few
chapters.

Machine Learning Eats Computer Science
Until recently, software engineers went to school to learn a number of basic algo‐
rithms (graph search, sorting, database queries, and so on). After school, these engi‐
neers would go out into the real world to apply these algorithms to systems. Most of
today’s digital economy is built on intricate chains of basic algorithms laboriously
glued together by generations of engineers. Most of these systems are not capable of
adapting. All configurations and reconfigurations have to be performed by highly
trained engineers, rendering systems brittle.
Machine learning promises to change the field of software development by enabling
systems to adapt dynamically. Deployed machine learning systems are capable of
learning desired behaviors from databases of examples. Furthermore, such systems


                                                                                       1
