                                                                           CHAPTER 1
                                                               Introduction




Machine learning is about extracting knowledge from data. It is a research field at the
intersection of statistics, artificial intelligence, and computer science and is also
known as predictive analytics or statistical learning. The application of machine
learning methods has in recent years become ubiquitous in everyday life. From auto‐
matic recommendations of which movies to watch, to what food to order or which
products to buy, to personalized online radio and recognizing your friends in your
photos, many modern websites and devices have machine learning algorithms at their
core. When you look at a complex website like Facebook, Amazon, or Netflix, it is
very likely that every part of the site contains multiple machine learning models.
Outside of commercial applications, machine learning has had a tremendous influ‐
ence on the way data-driven research is done today. The tools introduced in this book
have been applied to diverse scientific problems such as understanding stars, finding
distant planets, discovering new particles, analyzing DNA sequences, and providing
personalized cancer treatments.
Your application doesn’t need to be as large-scale or world-changing as these exam‐
ples in order to benefit from machine learning, though. In this chapter, we will
explain why machine learning has become so popular and discuss what kinds of
problems can be solved using machine learning. Then, we will show you how to build
your first machine learning model, introducing important concepts along the way.

Why Machine Learning?
In the early days of “intelligent” applications, many systems used handcoded rules of
“if ” and “else” decisions to process data or adjust to user input. Think of a spam filter
whose job is to move the appropriate incoming email messages to a spam folder. You
could make up a blacklist of words that would result in an email being marked as


                                                                                         1
spam. This would be an example of using an expert-designed rule system to design an
“intelligent” application. Manually crafting decision rules is feasible for some applica‐
tions, particularly those in which humans have a good understanding of the process
to model. However, using handcoded rules to make decisions has two major disad‐
vantages:

    • The logic required to make a decision is specific to a single domain and task.
      Changing the task even slightly might require a rewrite of the whole system.
    • Designing rules requires a deep understanding of how a decision should be made
      by a human expert.

One example of where this handcoded approach will fail is in detecting faces in
images. Today, every smartphone can detect a face in an image. However, face detec‐
tion was an unsolved problem until as recently as 2001. The main problem is that the
way in which pixels (which make up an image in a computer) are “perceived” by the
computer is very different from how humans perceive a face. This difference in repre‐
sentation makes it basically impossible for a human to come up with a good set of
rules to describe what constitutes a face in a digital image.
Using machine learning, however, simply presenting a program with a large collec‐
tion of images of faces is enough for an algorithm to determine what characteristics
are needed to identify a face.

Problems Machine Learning Can Solve
The most successful kinds of machine learning algorithms are those that automate
decision-making processes by generalizing from known examples. In this setting,
which is known as supervised learning, the user provides the algorithm with pairs of
inputs and desired outputs, and the algorithm finds a way to produce the desired out‐
put given an input. In particular, the algorithm is able to create an output for an input
it has never seen before without any help from a human. Going back to our example
of spam classification, using machine learning, the user provides the algorithm with a
large number of emails (which are the input), together with information about
whether any of these emails are spam (which is the desired output). Given a new
email, the algorithm will then produce a prediction as to whether the new email is
spam.
Machine learning algorithms that learn from input/output pairs are called supervised
learning algorithms because a “teacher” provides supervision to the algorithms in the
form of the desired outputs for each example that they learn from. While creating a
dataset of inputs and outputs is often a laborious manual process, supervised learning
algorithms are well understood and their performance is easy to measure. If your
application can be formulated as a supervised learning problem, and you are able to



2   |   Chapter 1: Introduction
