                    Download from finelybook www.finelybook.com
      icy gradients? Or build a robotic spider that learns to walk; give it rewards any
      time it gets closer to some objective (you will need sensors to measure the dis‐
      tance to the objective). The only limit is your imagination.

Solutions to these exercises are available in Appendix A.

Thank You!
Before we close the last chapter of this book, I would like to thank you for reading it
up to the last paragraph. I truly hope that you had as much pleasure reading this book
as I had writing it, and that it will be useful for your projects, big or small.
If you find errors, please send feedback. More generally, I would love to know what
you think, so please don’t hesitate to contact me via O’Reilly, or through the ageron/
handson-ml GitHub project.
Going forward, my best advice to you is to practice and practice: try going through all
the exercises if you have not done so already, play with the Jupyter notebooks, join
Kaggle.com or some other ML community, watch ML courses, read papers, attend
conferences, meet experts. You may also want to study some topics that we did not
cover in this book, including recommender systems, clustering algorithms, anomaly
detection algorithms, and genetic algorithms.
My greatest hope is that this book will inspire you to build a wonderful ML applica‐
tion that will benefit all of us! What will it be?
Aurélien Géron, November 26th, 2016




470   |   Chapter 16: Reinforcement Learning
                Download from finelybook www.finelybook.com


                                                                           APPENDIX A
                                                     Exercise Solutions




              Solutions to the coding exercises are available in the online Jupyter
              notebooks at https://github.com/ageron/handson-ml.




Chapter 1: The Machine Learning Landscape
1. Machine Learning is about building systems that can learn from data. Learning
   means getting better at some task, given some performance measure.
2. Machine Learning is great for complex problems for which we have no algorith‐
   mic solution, to replace long lists of hand-tuned rules, to build systems that adapt
   to fluctuating environments, and finally to help humans learn (e.g., data mining).
3. A labeled training set is a training set that contains the desired solution (a.k.a. a
   label) for each instance.
4. The two most common supervised tasks are regression and classification.
5. Common unsupervised tasks include clustering, visualization, dimensionality
   reduction, and association rule learning.
6. Reinforcement Learning is likely to perform best if we want a robot to learn to
   walk in various unknown terrains since this is typically the type of problem that
   Reinforcement Learning tackles. It might be possible to express the problem as a
   supervised or semisupervised learning problem, but it would be less natural.
7. If you don’t know how to define the groups, then you can use a clustering algo‐
   rithm (unsupervised learning) to segment your customers into clusters of similar
   customers. However, if you know what groups you would like to have, then you



                                                                                      471
