Deep Learning Outside the Tech Industry
Technological companies such as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and others have made
heavy investments in deep learning infrastructure. Most of these companies were
already familiar with machine learning systems, likely from past experiences with
machine learning such as with ad prediction systems or search engines. As a result,
shifting to deep learning from older machine learning systems took only a small con‐
ceptual shift. Also, the success of past machine learning applications has made tech
management quite open to the argument that deep learning could be more widely
applied within companies. For these reasons, software companies are likely to remain
the most prominent users of deep learning for the near future. If you intend to find a
job using deep learning within the next couple years, it’s likely that you will end up at
a tech company.
However, at the same time, there is a broader shift brewing in which deep learning is
beginning to infiltrate industries that historically have not used much machine learn‐
ing. Unlike simpler machine learning methods, deep learning reduces the need for
sophisticated feature preprocessing and allows for direct input of perceptual, textual,
and molecular data. As a result, a number of industries are taking note, and large-
scale efforts to overhaul these industries have already begun in many innovative start‐
ups. We will now briefly discuss some of the changes happening in nearby industries
and note that many new job opportunities for deep learning experts may become
available in the near future.

                     Applications Are Synergistic
                     You will soon learn about a number of deep learning applications
                     in different industries. The striking fact about these applications is
                     that all of them use the same fundamental deep learning algo‐
                     rithms. Techniques you’ve seen such as fully connected networks,
                     convolutional networks, recurrent networks, and reinforcement
                     learning are broadly applicable to any of these fields. In particular,
                     that means core improvements in convolutional network design
                     will yield fruit in pharmaceutical, agricultural, and robotics appli‐
                     cations. In reverse, deep learning innovations discovered by roboti‐
                     cists will filter back and strengthen the foundations of deep
                     learning. This virtuous cycle of fundamentals driving application
                     driving fundamentals means that deep learning is a force that’s here
                     to stay.


Deep Learning in the Pharmaceutical Industry
Deep learning is showing signs of taking off in a big way in drug discovery. Drug dis‐
covery is broken down into multiple phases. There’s the preclinical discovery phase,



226   |   Chapter 10: The Future of Deep Learning
