                   Download from finelybook www.finelybook.com
If all went well, your model will make good predictions. If not, you may need to use
more attributes (employment rate, health, air pollution, etc.), get more or better qual‐
ity training data, or perhaps select a more powerful model (e.g., a Polynomial Regres‐
sion model).
In summary:

     • You studied the data.
     • You selected a model.
     • You trained it on the training data (i.e., the learning algorithm searched for the
       model parameter values that minimize a cost function).
     • Finally, you applied the model to make predictions on new cases (this is called
       inference), hoping that this model will generalize well.

This is what a typical Machine Learning project looks like. In Chapter 2 you will
experience this first-hand by going through an end-to-end project.
We have covered a lot of ground so far: you now know what Machine Learning is
really about, why it is useful, what some of the most common categories of ML sys‐
tems are, and what a typical project workflow looks like. Now let’s look at what can go
wrong in learning and prevent you from making accurate predictions.

Main Challenges of Machine Learning
In short, since your main task is to select a learning algorithm and train it on some
data, the two things that can go wrong are “bad algorithm” and “bad data.” Let’s start
with examples of bad data.

Insufficient Quantity of Training Data
For a toddler to learn what an apple is, all it takes is for you to point to an apple and
say “apple” (possibly repeating this procedure a few times). Now the child is able to
recognize apples in all sorts of colors and shapes. Genius.
Machine Learning is not quite there yet; it takes a lot of data for most Machine Learn‐
ing algorithms to work properly. Even for very simple problems you typically need
thousands of examples, and for complex problems such as image or speech recogni‐
tion you may need millions of examples (unless you can reuse parts of an existing
model).




22    |   Chapter 1: The Machine Learning Landscape
