                                                                        CHAPTER 8
                                                            Wrapping Up




You now know how to apply the important machine learning algorithms for super‐
vised and unsupervised learning, which allow you to solve a wide variety of machine
learning problems. Before we leave you to explore all the possibilities that machine
learning offers, we want to give you some final words of advice, point you toward
some additional resources, and give you suggestions on how you can further improve
your machine learning and data science skills.

Approaching a Machine Learning Problem
With all the great methods that we introduced in this book now at your fingertips, it
may be tempting to jump in and start solving your data-related problem by just run‐
ning your favorite algorithm. However, this is not usually a good way to begin your
analysis. The machine learning algorithm is usually only a small part of a larger data
analysis and decision-making process. To make effective use of machine learning, we
need to take a step back and consider the problem at large. First, you should think
about what kind of question you want to answer. Do you want to do exploratory anal‐
ysis and just see if you find something interesting in the data? Or do you already have
a particular goal in mind? Often you will start with a goal, like detecting fraudulent
user transactions, making movie recommendations, or finding unknown planets. If
you have such a goal, before building a system to achieve it, you should first think
about how to define and measure success, and what the impact of a successful solu‐
tion would be to your overall business or research goals. Let’s say your goal is fraud
detection.




                                                                                    357
Then the following questions open up:

  • How do I measure if my fraud prediction is actually working?
  • Do I have the right data to evaluate an algorithm?
  • If I am successful, what will be the business impact of my solution?

As we discussed in Chapter 5, it is best if you can measure the performance of your
algorithm directly using a business metric, like increased profit or decreased losses.
This is often hard to do, though. A question that can be easier to answer is “What if I
built the perfect model?” If perfectly detecting any fraud will save your company $100
a month, these possible savings will probably not be enough to warrant the effort of
you even starting to develop an algorithm. On the other hand, if the model might
save your company tens of thousands of dollars every month, the problem might be
worth exploring.
Say you’ve defined the problem to solve, you know a solution might have a significant
impact for your project, and you’ve ensured that you have the right information to
evaluate success. The next steps are usually acquiring the data and building a working
prototype. In this book we have talked about many models you can employ, and how
to properly evaluate and tune these models. While trying out models, though, keep in
mind that this is only a small part of a larger data science workflow, and model build‐
ing is often part of a feedback circle of collecting new data, cleaning data, building
models, and analyzing the models. Analyzing the mistakes a model makes can often
be informative about what is missing in the data, what additional data could be col‐
lected, or how the task could be reformulated to make machine learning more effec‐
tive. Collecting more or different data or changing the task formulation slightly might
provide a much higher payoff than running endless grid searches to tune parameters.

Humans in the Loop
You should also consider if and how you should have humans in the loop. Some pro‐
cesses (like pedestrian detection in a self-driving car) need to make immediate deci‐
sions. Others might not need immediate responses, and so it can be possible to have
humans confirm uncertain decisions. Medical applications, for example, might need
very high levels of precision that possibly cannot be achieved by a machine learning
algorithm alone. But if an algorithm can make 90 percent, 50 percent, or maybe even
just 10 percent of decisions automatically, that might already increase response time
or reduce cost. Many applications are dominated by “simple cases,” for which an algo‐
rithm can make a decision, with relatively few “complicated cases,” which can be
rerouted to a human.




358   |   Chapter 8: Wrapping Up
