                                                                           CHAPTER 1
                                                               Introduction




Machine learning is about extracting knowledge from data. It is a research field at the
intersection of statistics, artificial intelligence, and computer science and is also
known as predictive analytics or statistical learning. The application of machine
learning methods has in recent years become ubiquitous in everyday life. From auto‐
matic recommendations of which movies to watch, to what food to order or which
products to buy, to personalized online radio and recognizing your friends in your
photos, many modern websites and devices have machine learning algorithms at their
core. When you look at a complex website like Facebook, Amazon, or Netflix, it is
very likely that every part of the site contains multiple machine learning models.
Outside of commercial applications, machine learning has had a tremendous influ‐
ence on the way data-driven research is done today. The tools introduced in this book
have been applied to diverse scientific problems such as understanding stars, finding
distant planets, discovering new particles, analyzing DNA sequences, and providing
personalized cancer treatments.
Your application doesn’t need to be as large-scale or world-changing as these exam‐
ples in order to benefit from machine learning, though. In this chapter, we will
explain why machine learning has become so popular and discuss what kinds of
problems can be solved using machine learning. Then, we will show you how to build
your first machine learning model, introducing important concepts along the way.

Why Machine Learning?
In the early days of “intelligent” applications, many systems used handcoded rules of
“if ” and “else” decisions to process data or adjust to user input. Think of a spam filter
whose job is to move the appropriate incoming email messages to a spam folder. You
could make up a blacklist of words that would result in an email being marked as


                                                                                         1
