CHAPTER 40



Google Cloud Dataflow
Google Cloud Dataflow provides a serverless, parallel, and distributed infrastructure
for running jobs for batch and stream data processing. One of the core strengths of
Dataflow is its ability to almost seamlessly handle the switch from processing of batch
historical data to streaming datasets while elegantly taking into consideration the perks
of streaming processing such as windowing. Dataflow is a major component of the data/
ML pipeline on GCP. Typically, Dataflow is used to transform humongous datasets from
a variety of sources such as Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka to a sink such as BigQuery
or Google Cloud Storage.
     Critical to Dataflow is the use of the Apache Beam programming model for building
the parallel data processing pipelines for batch and stream operations. The data
processing pipelines built with the Beam SDKs can be executed on various processing
backends such as Apache Apex, Apache Spark, Apache Flink, and of course Google
Cloud Dataflow. In this section, we will build data transformation pipelines using the
Beam Python SDK. As of this time of writing, Beam also supports building data pipelines
using Java, Go, and Scala languages.



B
 eam Programming
Apache Beam provides a set of broad concepts to simplify the process of building a
transformation pipeline for distributed batch and stream jobs. We’ll go through these
concepts providing simple code samples:

       •    A Pipeline: A Pipeline object wraps the entire operation and
            prescribes the transformation process by defining the input data
            source to the pipeline, how that data will be transformed, and where
            the data will be written. Also, the Pipeline object indicates the
            distributed processing backend to execute on. Indeed, a Pipeline

                                                                                          537
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_40
