CHAPTER 15



Batch vs. Online Learning
Data is a vital component for building learning models. There are two design choices for
how data is used in the modeling pipeline. The first is to build your learning model with
data at rest (batch learning), and the other is when the data is flowing in streams into
the learning algorithm (online learning). This flow can be as individual sample points in
your dataset, or it can be in small batch sizes. Let’s briefly discuss these concepts.



B
 atch Learning
In batch learning the machine learning model is trained using the entire dataset that
is available at a certain point in time. Once we have a model that performs well on the
test set, the model is shipped for production and thus learning ends. This process is also
called offline learning. If in the process of time, new data becomes available, and there is
need to update the model based on the new data, the model is trained from scratch all
over again using both the previous data samples and the new data samples.
     This pipeline is further illustrated in Figure 15-1.




                                                                                          199
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_15
Chapter 15   Batch vs. Online Learning




Figure 15-1. Batch learning

    In a situation where there is a need to train the model with data that is generated
continuously from the source, batch learning becomes inappropriate to deal with that
situation. In such a circumstance, we want to be able to update our learning model on
the go, based on the new data samples that are available.



O
 nline Learning
In online learning, data streams (either individually or in mini-batches) into the learning
algorithm and updates the model. Online learning is ideal in situations where data is
generated continuously in time, and we need to use real-time data samples to build a
prediction model. A typical example of this case is in stock market prediction.
    Online learning is illustrated in Figure 15-2.

200
