                                                                            CHAPTER 7
                                         Working with Text Data




In Chapter 4, we talked about two kinds of features that can represent properties of
the data: continuous features that describe a quantity, and categorical features that are
items from a fixed list. There is a third kind of feature that can be found in many
applications, which is text. For example, if we want to classify an email message as
either a legitimate email or spam, the content of the email will certainly contain
important information for this classification task. Or maybe we want to learn about
the opinion of a politician on the topic of immigration. Here, that individual’s
speeches or tweets might provide useful information. In customer service, we often
want to find out if a message is a complaint or an inquiry. We can use the subject line
and content of a message to automatically determine the customer’s intent, which
allows us to send the message to the appropriate department, or even send a fully
automatic reply.
Text data is usually represented as strings, made up of characters. In any of the exam‐
ples just given, the length of the text data will vary. This feature is clearly very differ‐
ent from the numeric features that we’ve discussed so far, and we will need to process
the data before we can apply our machine learning algorithms to it.

Types of Data Represented as Strings
Before we dive into the processing steps that go into representing text data for
machine learning, we want to briefly discuss different kinds of text data that you
might encounter. Text is usually just a string in your dataset, but not all string features
should be treated as text. A string feature can sometimes represent categorical vari‐
ables, as we discussed in Chapter 5. There is no way to know how to treat a string
feature before looking at the data.




                                                                                         323
