CHAPTER 12



Matplotlib and Seaborn
It is critical to be able to plot the observations and variables of a dataset before subjecting
the dataset to some machine learning algorithm or another. Data visualization is
essential to understand your data and to glean insights into the underlying structure of
the dataset. These insights help the scientist in deciding with statistical analysis or which
learning algorithm is more appropriate for the given dataset. Also, the scientist can get
ideas on suitable transformations to apply to the dataset.
      In general, visualization in data science can conveniently be split into univariate
and multivariate data visualizations. Univariate data visualization involves plotting
a single variable to understand more about its distribution and structure, while
multivariate plots expose the relationship and structure between two or more variables.


M
 atplotlib and Seaborn
Matplotlib is a graphics package for data visualization in Python. Matplotlib has arisen
as a key component in the Python data science stack and is well integrated with NumPy
and Pandas. The pyplot module mirrors the MATLAB plotting commands closely.
Hence, MATLAB users can easily transit to plotting with Python.
    Seaborn, on the other hand, extends the Matplotlib library for creating beautiful
graphics with Python using a more straightforward set of methods. Seaborn is more
integrated for working with Pandas DataFrames. We will go through creating simple
essential plots with Matplotlib and seaborn.


Pandas Plotting Methods
Pandas also has a robust set of plotting functions which we will also use for visualizing
our dataset. The reader will observe how we can easily convert datasets from NumPy to
Pandas and vice versa to take advantage of one functionality or the other. The plotting
features of Pandas are found in the plotting module.
                                                                                        151
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_12
