CHAPTER 3



The Google Cloud SDK
and Web CLI
GCP provides a command-line interface (CLI) for interacting with cloud products and
services. GCP resources can be accessed via the web-based CLI on GCP or by installing
the Google Cloud software development kit (SDK) on your local machine to interact with
GCP via the local command-line terminal.
    GCP contains shell commands for a wide range of GCP products such as the
Compute Engine, Cloud Storage, Cloud ML Engine, BigQuery, and Datalab, to mention
just a few. Major tools of the Cloud SDK include

       •    gcloud tool: Responsible for cloud authentication, configuration, and
            other interactions on GCP

       •    gsutil tool: Responsible for interacting with Google Cloud Storage
            buckets and objects

       •    bq tool: Used for interacting and managing Google BigQuery via the
            command line

       •    kubectl tool: Used for managing Kubernetes container clusters on GCP

    The Google Cloud SDK also installs client libraries for developers to
programmatically interact with GCP products and services through APIs.1 As of this time
of writing, the Go, Java, Node.js, Python, Ruby, PHP, and C# languages are covered. Many
more are expected to be added to this list.
    This chapter works through setting up an account on GCP, installing the Google
Cloud SDK, and then exploring GCP commands using the CLI.


1
  PIs stands for application programming interfaces, which are packages and tools used in
 A
 building software applications.
                                                                                             11
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_3
Chapter 3   The Google Cloud SDK and Web CLI


Setting Up an Account on Google Cloud Platform
This section shows how to set up an account on Google Cloud Platform. A GCP account
gives access to all of the platform’s products and services. For a new account, a $300
credit is awarded to be spent over a period of 12 months. This offer is great as it gives
ample time to explore the different features and services of Google’s cloud offering.
    Note that a valid credit card is required to register an account to validate that it is an
authentic user, as opposed to a robot. However, the credit card won’t be charged after
the trial ends, except Google is authorized to do so:

      1. Go to https://cloud.google.com/ to open an account (see
         Figure 3-1).




Figure 3-1. Google Cloud Platform login page

      2. Fill in the necessary identity, address, and credit card details.

      3. Wait a moment while an account is created on the platform (see
         Figure 3-2).



12
