      TensorFlow have recently made deep learning approaches much more accessible
      than they once were. As of the writing of this book, deep learning in Python is
      still relatively young, and so I can’t yet point to any definitive resource. That said,
      the list of references in the following section should provide a useful place to
      start.

Further Machine Learning Resources
This chapter has been a quick tour of machine learning in Python, primarily using
the tools within the Scikit-Learn library. As long as the chapter is, it is still too short
to cover many interesting and important algorithms, approaches, and discussions.
Here I want to suggest some resources for those who would like to learn more about
machine learning.

Machine Learning in Python
To learn more about machine learning in Python, I’d suggest some of the following
resources:
The Scikit-Learn website
    The Scikit-Learn website has an impressive breadth of documentation and exam‐
    ples covering some of the models discussed here, and much, much more. If you
    want a brief survey of the most important and often used machine learning algo‐
    rithms, this website is a good place to start.
SciPy, PyCon, and PyData tutorial videos
    Scikit-Learn and other machine learning topics are perennial favorites in the
    tutorial tracks of many Python-focused conference series, in particular the
    PyCon, SciPy, and PyData conferences. You can find the most recent ones via a
    simple web search.
Introduction to Machine Learning with Python
     Written by Andreas C. Mueller and Sarah Guido, this book includes a fuller treat‐
     ment of the topics in this chapter. If you’re interested in reviewing the fundamen‐
     tals of machine learning and pushing the Scikit-Learn toolkit to its limits, this is a
     great resource, written by one of the most prolific developers on the Scikit-Learn
     team.
Python Machine Learning
    Sebastian Raschka’s book focuses less on Scikit-Learn itself, and more on the
    breadth of machine learning tools available in Python. In particular, there is
    some very useful discussion on how to scale Python-based machine learning
    approaches to large and complex datasets.




514   |   Chapter 5: Machine Learning
General Machine Learning
Of course, machine learning is much broader than just the Python world. There are
many good resources to take your knowledge further, and here I highlight a few that I
have found useful:
Machine Learning
   Taught by Andrew Ng (Coursera), this is a very clearly taught, free online course
   covering the basics of machine learning from an algorithmic perspective. It
   assumes undergraduate-level understanding of mathematics and programming,
   and steps through detailed considerations of some of the most important
   machine learning algorithms. Homework assignments, which are algorithmically
   graded, have you actually implement some of these models yourself.
Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning
    Written by Christopher Bishop, this classic technical text covers the concepts of
    machine learning discussed in this chapter in detail. If you plan to go further in
    this subject, you should have this book on your shelf.
Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective
   Written by Kevin Murphy, this is an excellent graduate-level text that explores
   nearly all important machine learning algorithms from a ground-up, unified
   probabilistic perspective.
These resources are more technical than the material presented in this book, but to
really understand the fundamentals of these methods requires a deep dive into the
mathematics behind them. If you’re up for the challenge and ready to bring your data
science to the next level, don’t hesitate to dive in!




                                                    Further Machine Learning Resources   |   515
