                                                       Chapter 1   What Is Cloud Computing?

      •   Private cloud: In a private cloud, an organization is solely responsible
          for the management and servicing of its computing infrastructure.
          The machines in a private cloud can be located on-premises, or it
          can be hosted with a cloud service provider but routed on a private
          network.

      •   Hybrid cloud: The hybrid cloud is a compromise between the cost
          and efficiency of a public cloud and the data sovereignty and in-­
          house security assurances of the private cloud. Many companies
          and institutions opt for a hybrid cloud and multi-cloud by using
          technology solutions to facilitate easy porting and sharing of data and
          applications between on-premise and cloud-based infrastructures.



Cloud Computing Models
Cloud computing is also categorized into three models of service delivery. They are
illustrated as a pyramid as shown in Figure 1-2, where the layers of infrastructure
abstraction increase as we approach the apex of the pyramid:

      •   Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): This model is best suited for
          enterprises or individuals who want to manage the hardware
          infrastructure that hosts their data and applications. This level
          of fine-grained management requires the necessary system
          administration skills.

      •   Platform as a Service (PaaS): In the PaaS model, the hardware
          configuration is managed by the cloud service provider, as well as
          other system and development tools. This relieves the user to focus
          on the business logic for quick and easy deployment of application
          and database solutions. Another concept that comes up together
          with PaaS is the idea of Serverless, where the cloud service provider
          manages a scalable infrastructure that utilizes and relinquishes
          resources according to demand.

      •   Software as a Service (SaaS): The SaaS model is most recognizable
          by the general public, as a great deal of users interact with SaaS
          applications without knowing. The typical examples of SaaS


                                                                                         5
Chapter 1    What Is Cloud Computing?

            applications are enterprise email suites such as Gmail, Outlook, and
            Yahoo! Mail. Others include storage platforms like Google Drive and
            Dropbox, photo software like Google Photos, and CRM e-suites like
            Salesforce and Oracle E-business Suite.




Figure 1-2. Models of cloud computing

    In this chapter, we summarized the practice of cloud computing by explaining the
different categories of cloud solutions and the models for service delivery over the cloud.
    The next chapters in Part 1 will provide an introduction to Google Cloud Platform
Infrastructure and Services and introduce JupyterLab Instances, and Google
Colaboratory for prototyping machine learning models and doing data science and
analytics tasks.




6
CHAPTER 2



An Overview of Google
Cloud Platform Services
Google Cloud Platform offers a wide range of services for securing, storing, serving,
and analyzing data. These cloud services form a secure cloud perimeter for data, where
different operations and transformations can be carried out on the data without it ever
leaving the cloud ecosystem.
     The services offered by Google Cloud include compute, storage, big data/analytics,
artificial intelligence (AI), and other networking, developer, and management services.
Let’s briefly review some of the features of the Google Cloud ecosystem.



C
 loud Compute
Google Compute offers a range of products shown in Figure 2-1 for catering to a wide
range of computational needs. The compute products consist of the Compute Engine
(virtual computing instances for custom processing), App Engine (a cloud-managed
platform for developing web, mobile, and IoT app), Kubernetes Engine (orchestration
manager for custom docker containers based on Kubernetes), Container Registry
(private container storage), Serverless Cloud Functions (cloud-based functions to
connect or extend cloud services), and Cloud Run (managed compute platform that
automatically scales your stateless containers).




                                                                                          7
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_2
