Deep Learning Outside the Tech Industry
Technological companies such as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and others have made
heavy investments in deep learning infrastructure. Most of these companies were
already familiar with machine learning systems, likely from past experiences with
machine learning such as with ad prediction systems or search engines. As a result,
shifting to deep learning from older machine learning systems took only a small con‐
ceptual shift. Also, the success of past machine learning applications has made tech
management quite open to the argument that deep learning could be more widely
applied within companies. For these reasons, software companies are likely to remain
the most prominent users of deep learning for the near future. If you intend to find a
job using deep learning within the next couple years, it’s likely that you will end up at
a tech company.
However, at the same time, there is a broader shift brewing in which deep learning is
beginning to infiltrate industries that historically have not used much machine learn‐
ing. Unlike simpler machine learning methods, deep learning reduces the need for
sophisticated feature preprocessing and allows for direct input of perceptual, textual,
and molecular data. As a result, a number of industries are taking note, and large-
scale efforts to overhaul these industries have already begun in many innovative start‐
ups. We will now briefly discuss some of the changes happening in nearby industries
and note that many new job opportunities for deep learning experts may become
available in the near future.

                     Applications Are Synergistic
                     You will soon learn about a number of deep learning applications
                     in different industries. The striking fact about these applications is
                     that all of them use the same fundamental deep learning algo‐
                     rithms. Techniques you’ve seen such as fully connected networks,
                     convolutional networks, recurrent networks, and reinforcement
                     learning are broadly applicable to any of these fields. In particular,
                     that means core improvements in convolutional network design
                     will yield fruit in pharmaceutical, agricultural, and robotics appli‐
                     cations. In reverse, deep learning innovations discovered by roboti‐
                     cists will filter back and strengthen the foundations of deep
                     learning. This virtuous cycle of fundamentals driving application
                     driving fundamentals means that deep learning is a force that’s here
                     to stay.


Deep Learning in the Pharmaceutical Industry
Deep learning is showing signs of taking off in a big way in drug discovery. Drug dis‐
covery is broken down into multiple phases. There’s the preclinical discovery phase,



226   |   Chapter 10: The Future of Deep Learning
where the effects of potential drugs are tested indirectly in test tubes and in animals,
followed by the clinical phase where therapeutics are tested directly in human volun‐
teers. Medicine that passes both nonhuman and human testing is approved for sale to
consumers.
Researchers have begun to construct models that optimize each part of the drug dis‐
covery process. For example, molecular deep learning has been applied to problems
such as predicting the potential toxicity of putative medications and to chemical
problems involved in the synthesis and design of drug-like molecules. Other
researchers and companies are using deep convolutional networks to design new
experiments that closely track cellular behavior on massive scales to obtain stronger
understanding of novel biology. These applications have had some impact on the
pharmaceutical world, but nothing dramatic yet since it isn’t possible to build one
drug discovery model that “designs” a novel drug. However, as more data gathering
efforts continue and more biological and chemical deep learning models are
designed, this state of affairs could change drastically in the next few years.

Deep Learning in Law
The legal industry relies heavily on precedent in the legal literature to make argu‐
ments about the legality or illegality of new cases. Traditionally, legions of paralegal
researchers have been employed by large law firms to perform the needed lookups
into the legal literature. In more recent years, legal search engines have become stan‐
dard fare for most sophisticated firms.
Such search algorithms are still relatively immature, and it’s likely that deep learning
systems for neurolinguistic processing (NLP) can offer significant improvements. For
example, a number of startups are working on building deep NLP systems that offer
better querying of legal precedent. Other startups are working on predictive methods
that use machine learning to predict the outcome of litigation, while a few are even
experimenting with methods for automated generation of legal arguments.
In general, these sophisticated applications of deep models will take time to mature,
but the groundswell of legal AI innovation likely heralds a dramatic shift in the legal
profession.

Deep Learning for Robotics
The robotics industry has traditionally avoided deploying machine learning since it’s
not easy to prove that machine-learned systems are safe to deploy. This lack of safety
guarantees can become a major liability when building systems that need to be safe
for deployment around human operators.
In recent years, though, it’s become clear that deep reinforcement learning systems,
combined with low data learning techniques, can offer dramatic improvements in


                                                   Deep Learning Outside the Tech Industry   |   227
