CHAPTER 5



Google Compute Engine
(GCE)
Google Compute Engine (GCE) makes available to users virtual machines (VMs) that are
running on Google’s data centers around the world. These machines take advantage of
Google’s state-of-the-art fiber optic powered network capabilities to offer fast and high-­
performance machines that can scale based on usage and automatically deal with issues
of load balancing.
     GCE provides a variety of pre-defined machine types for use out of the box; also it
has the option to create custom machines that are tailored to the specific needs of the
user. Another major feature of GCE is the ability to use computing resources that are
currently idle on Google infrastructure for a short period of time to enhance or speed up
the processing capabilities of batch jobs or fault-tolerant workloads. These machines are
called preemptible VMs and come at a huge cost-benefit to the user as they are about
80% cheaper than regular machines.
     Again one of the major benefits of GCEs is that the user only pays for the time
the machines are actually in operation. Also, when the machines are used for a long
uninterrupted period of time, discounts are accrued to the prices.
     In this chapter, we will go through a simple example of provisioning and tearing
down a Linux machine on the cloud. The examples will cover using the Google Cloud
web interface and the command-line interface for creating VMs on GCP.



Provisioning a VM Instance
To deploy a VM instance, click the triple dash in the top-left corner of the web page to
pull out the GCP resources drawer. In the group named ‘COMPUTE’, click the arrow
beside ‘Compute Engine’ and select ‘VM instances’ as shown in Figure 5-1.

                                                                                           35
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_5
Chapter 5   Google Compute Engine (GCE)




Figure 5-1. Select VM instances

     Click ‘Create’ to begin the process of deploying a VM instance (see Figure 5-2).




36
                                             Chapter 5   Google Compute Engine (GCE)




Figure 5-2. Begin process of deploying a VM instance




                                                                                 37
Chapter 5   Google Compute Engine (GCE)




Figure 5-3. Options for creating an instance

     The labeled numbers in Figure 5-3 are explained here:

       1. Choose the instance name. This name must start with a lowercase
          letter and can include numbers or hyphens, but should not end
          with a hyphen.

       2. Select the instance region and zone. This is the geographical
          region where your computing instance is located, while the zone
          is a location within a region.

       3. Select the machine type. This allows for customization of the
          cores, memory, and GPUs for the VM (see Figure 5-4).




38
                                                  Chapter 5   Google Compute Engine (GCE)




Figure 5-4. Select machine type

     4. Select the boot disk. This option selects a disk to boot from. This
        disk could be created from an OS image, an application image, a
        custom image, or a snapshot of an image (see Figure 5-5).




                                                                                      39
Chapter 5   Google Compute Engine (GCE)




Figure 5-5. Select boot disk

      5. Select ‘Allow HTTP traffic’ to allow network traffic from the
         Internet as shown in Figure 5-6.




40
                                                   Chapter 5   Google Compute Engine (GCE)




Figure 5-6. Allow network traffic to VM

      6. Click ‘Create’ in Figure 5-6 to deploy the VM instance.



Connecting to the VM Instance
In the VM instances page that lists the created VMs, click ‘SSH’ beside the created
instance as shown in Figure 5-7. This launches a new window with terminal access to the
created VM as shown in Figures 5-8 and 5-9.




                                                                                       41
