Out[9]:
    Python version: 3.5.2 |Anaconda 4.1.1 (64-bit)| (default, Jul               2 2016, 17:53:06)
    [GCC 4.4.7 20120313 (Red Hat 4.4.7-1)]
    pandas version: 0.18.1
    matplotlib version: 1.5.1
    NumPy version: 1.11.1
    SciPy version: 0.17.1
    IPython version: 5.1.0
    scikit-learn version: 0.18
While it is not important to match these versions exactly, you should have a version
of scikit-learn that is as least as recent as the one we used.
Now that we have everything set up, let’s dive into our first application of machine
learning.

                This book assumes that you have version 0.18 or later of scikit-
                learn. The model_selection module was added in 0.18, and if you
                use an earlier version of scikit-learn, you will need to adjust the
                imports from this module.


A First Application: Classifying Iris Species
In this section, we will go through a simple machine learning application and create
our first model. In the process, we will introduce some core concepts and terms.
Let’s assume that a hobby botanist is interested in distinguishing the species of some
iris flowers that she has found. She has collected some measurements associated with
each iris: the length and width of the petals and the length and width of the sepals, all
measured in centimeters (see Figure 1-2).
She also has the measurements of some irises that have been previously identified by
an expert botanist as belonging to the species setosa, versicolor, or virginica. For these
measurements, she can be certain of which species each iris belongs to. Let’s assume
that these are the only species our hobby botanist will encounter in the wild.
Our goal is to build a machine learning model that can learn from the measurements
of these irises whose species is known, so that we can predict the species for a new
iris.




                                                     A First Application: Classifying Iris Species   |   13
Figure 1-2. Parts of the iris flower

Because we have measurements for which we know the correct species of iris, this is a
supervised learning problem. In this problem, we want to predict one of several
options (the species of iris). This is an example of a classification problem. The possi‐
ble outputs (different species of irises) are called classes. Every iris in the dataset
belongs to one of three classes, so this problem is a three-class classification problem.
The desired output for a single data point (an iris) is the species of this flower. For a
particular data point, the species it belongs to is called its label.

Meet the Data
The data we will use for this example is the Iris dataset, a classical dataset in machine
learning and statistics. It is included in scikit-learn in the datasets module. We
can load it by calling the load_iris function:
In[10]:
     from sklearn.datasets import load_iris
     iris_dataset = load_iris()

The iris object that is returned by load_iris is a Bunch object, which is very similar
to a dictionary. It contains keys and values:


14   | Chapter 1: Introduction
