where the effects of potential drugs are tested indirectly in test tubes and in animals,
followed by the clinical phase where therapeutics are tested directly in human volun‐
teers. Medicine that passes both nonhuman and human testing is approved for sale to
consumers.
Researchers have begun to construct models that optimize each part of the drug dis‐
covery process. For example, molecular deep learning has been applied to problems
such as predicting the potential toxicity of putative medications and to chemical
problems involved in the synthesis and design of drug-like molecules. Other
researchers and companies are using deep convolutional networks to design new
experiments that closely track cellular behavior on massive scales to obtain stronger
understanding of novel biology. These applications have had some impact on the
pharmaceutical world, but nothing dramatic yet since it isn’t possible to build one
drug discovery model that “designs” a novel drug. However, as more data gathering
efforts continue and more biological and chemical deep learning models are
designed, this state of affairs could change drastically in the next few years.

Deep Learning in Law
The legal industry relies heavily on precedent in the legal literature to make argu‐
ments about the legality or illegality of new cases. Traditionally, legions of paralegal
researchers have been employed by large law firms to perform the needed lookups
into the legal literature. In more recent years, legal search engines have become stan‐
dard fare for most sophisticated firms.
Such search algorithms are still relatively immature, and it’s likely that deep learning
systems for neurolinguistic processing (NLP) can offer significant improvements. For
example, a number of startups are working on building deep NLP systems that offer
better querying of legal precedent. Other startups are working on predictive methods
that use machine learning to predict the outcome of litigation, while a few are even
experimenting with methods for automated generation of legal arguments.
In general, these sophisticated applications of deep models will take time to mature,
but the groundswell of legal AI innovation likely heralds a dramatic shift in the legal
profession.

Deep Learning for Robotics
The robotics industry has traditionally avoided deploying machine learning since it’s
not easy to prove that machine-learned systems are safe to deploy. This lack of safety
guarantees can become a major liability when building systems that need to be safe
for deployment around human operators.
In recent years, though, it’s become clear that deep reinforcement learning systems,
combined with low data learning techniques, can offer dramatic improvements in


                                                   Deep Learning Outside the Tech Industry   |   227
