Deep Learning Architectures
There have been hundreds of different deep learning models that combine the deep
learning primitives presented in the previous section. Some of these architectures
have been historically important. Others were the first presentations of novel designs
that influenced perceptions of what deep learning could do.
In this section, we present a selection of different deep learning architectures that
have proven influential for the research community. We want to emphasize that this
is an episodic history that makes no attempt to be exhaustive. There are certainly
important models in the literature that have not been presented here.

LeNet
The LeNet architecture is arguably the first prominent “deep” convolutional architec‐
ture. Introduced in 1988, it was used to perform optical character recoginition (OCR)
for documents. Although it performed its task admirably, the computational cost of
the LeNet was extreme for the computer hardware available at the time, so the design
languished in (relative) obscurity for a few decades after its creation. This architec‐
ture is illustrated in Figure 1-5.




Figure 1-5. The LeNet architecture for image processing. Introduced in 1988, it was argu‐
ably the first deep convolutional model for image processing.

AlexNet
The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) was first organ‐
ized in 2010 as a test of the progress made in visual recognition systems. The organiz‐
ers made use of Amazon Mechanical Turk, an online platform to connect workers to
requesters, to catalog a large collection of images with associated lists of objects
present in the image. The use of Mechanical Turk permitted the curation of a collec‐
tion of data significantly larger than those gathered previously.
The first two years the challenge ran, more traditional machine-learned systems that
relied on systems like HOG and SIFT features (hand-tuned visual feature extraction
methods) triumphed. In 2012, the AlexNet architecture, based on a modification of
LeNet run on powerful graphics processing units (GPUs), entered and dominated the


6   |   Chapter 1: Introduction to Deep Learning
