Figure 6-16. The CycleGAN is capable of performing complex image transformations,
such as transforming images of horses into those of zebras (and vice versa).

Unfortunately, generative adversarial networks are still challenging to train in prac‐
tice. Making generators and discriminators learn reasonable functions requires a
deep bag of tricks. As a result, while there have been many exciting GAN demonstra‐
tions, GANs have not yet matured into a state where they can be widely deployed in
industrial applications.

Training a Convolutional Network in TensorFlow
In this section we consider a code sample for training a simple convolutional neural
network. In particular, our code sample will demonstrate how to train a LeNet-5 con‐
volutional architecture on the MNIST dataset using TensorFlow. As always, we rec‐
ommend that you follow along by running the full code sample from the GitHub
repo associated with the book.

The MNIST Dataset
The MNIST dataset consists of images of handwritten digits. The machine learning
challenge associated with MNIST consists of creating a model trained on the training
set of digits that generalizes to the validation set. Figure 6-17 shows some images
drawn from the MNIST dataset.




134   |   Chapter 6: Convolutional Neural Networks
Figure 6-17. Some images of handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset. The learning
challenge is to predict the digit from the image.

MNIST was a very important dataset for the development of machine learning meth‐
ods for computer vision. The dataset is challenging enough that obvious, non-
learning methods don’t tend to do well. At the same time, MNIST is small enough
that experimenting with new architectures doesn’t require very large amounts of
computing power.
However, the MNIST dataset has mostly become obsolete. The best models achieve
near one hundred percent test accuracy. Note that this fact doesn’t mean that the
problem of handwritten digit recognition is solved! Rather, it is likely that human sci‐
entists have overfit architectures to the MNIST dataset and capitalized on its quirks to
achieve very high predictive accuracies. As a result, it’s no longer good practice to use
MNIST to design new deep architectures. That said, MNIST is still a superb dataset
for pedagogical purposes.

Loading MNIST
The MNIST codebase is located online on Yann LeCun’s website. The download
script pulls down the raw file from the website. Notice how the script caches the
download so repeated calls to download() won’t waste effort.



                                              Training a Convolutional Network in TensorFlow   |   135
