CHAPTER 39



Google Cloud Dataprep
Google Cloud Dataprep is a managed cloud service for quick data exploration and
transformation. Dataprep makes it easy to clean and transform large datasets for
analysis. It is auto-scalable as it takes advantage of the distributed processing capabilities
of Google Cloud Dataflow.
    Typically Cloud Dataprep is aimed at easing the data preparation process. Datasets
from real-world use cases are often messy and untidy. In this form, it cannot be used
for downstream analytics or machine learning modeling. Hence, a large portion of the
modeling process involves preparing and cleaning the data. Programming libraries
earlier discussed like Pandas are centrally used for carrying out data preparation.
However, Google Cloud Dataprep provides a simple visual interface for performing data
cleaning. The ability to re-organize the dataset for modeling quickly without coding
provides an instant appeal for Dataprep, as this can greatly speed up the time spent in
data preparation as part of the overall modeling pipeline. The other good part is that
Dataprep can work with petabyte scale data as it is built on a serverless infrastructure.
Dataprep can be used for processing structured and unstructured datasets.
    In this section, we’ll go through a brief tour of Google Dataprep by using it to prepare
our ‘crypto_markets.csv’ dataset already stored on Google Cloud Storage.



Getting Started with Cloud Dataprep
From the GCP dashboard, click the triple dash at the top-left corner and scroll down to
‘Dataprep’ under the BIG DATA section as seen in Figure 39-1.




                                                                                          519
© Ekaba Bisong 2019
E. Bisong, Building Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models on Google Cloud Platform,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4470-8_39
Chapter 39   Google Cloud Dataprep




Figure 39-1. Open Dataprep via the GCP dashboard

     Dataprep is a service offered on GCP in alliance with the company Trifacta. To begin
using Dataprep, agree and accept all the license agreements (see Figure 39-2). Dataprep
creates a bucket on GCS to store the files that are uploaded to Dataprep and the outputs
of its transformation (see Figure 39-3). The Dataprep dashboard is shown in Figure 39-4.




520
                                           Chapter 39   Google Cloud Dataprep




Figure 39-2. Trifacta license agreement




Figure 39-3. Dataprep GCS location setup
                                                                         521
Chapter 39   Google Cloud Dataprep


Using Flows to Transform Data
A Dataprep flow is an object created to organize and manage the datasets and operations
that are involved in data cleaning and transformation process:

      1. We begin by creating a flow by clicking the ‘Create Flow’ button in
         the top-right corner of the Dataprep dashboard (see Figure 39-4).
         Enter the user-defined flow name and click ‘Create’ as shown in
         Figure 39-5. The Flow page is shown in Figure 39-6.




Figure 39-4. Dataprep dashboard




522
