                                                                          CHAPTER 5
                                                    Machine Learning




In many ways, machine learning is the primary means by which data science mani‐
fests itself to the broader world. Machine learning is where these computational and
algorithmic skills of data science meet the statistical thinking of data science, and the
result is a collection of approaches to inference and data exploration that are not
about effective theory so much as effective computation.
The term “machine learning” is sometimes thrown around as if it is some kind of
magic pill: apply machine learning to your data, and all your problems will be solved!
As you might expect, the reality is rarely this simple. While these methods can be
incredibly powerful, to be effective they must be approached with a firm grasp of the
strengths and weaknesses of each method, as well as a grasp of general concepts such
as bias and variance, overfitting and underfitting, and more.
This chapter will dive into practical aspects of machine learning, primarily using
Python’s Scikit-Learn package. This is not meant to be a comprehensive introduction
to the field of machine learning; that is a large subject and necessitates a more techni‐
cal approach than we take here. Nor is it meant to be a comprehensive manual for the
use of the Scikit-Learn package (for this, see “Further Machine Learning Resources”
on page 514). Rather, the goals of this chapter are:

  • To introduce the fundamental vocabulary and concepts of machine learning.
  • To introduce the Scikit-Learn API and show some examples of its use.
  • To take a deeper dive into the details of several of the most important machine
    learning approaches, and develop an intuition into how they work and when and
    where they are applicable.

Much of this material is drawn from the Scikit-Learn tutorials and workshops I have
given on several occasions at PyCon, SciPy, PyData, and other conferences. Any


                                                                                      331
clarity in the following pages is likely due to the many workshop participants and co-
instructors who have given me valuable feedback on this material over the years!
Finally, if you are seeking a more comprehensive or technical treatment of any of
these subjects, I’ve listed several resources and references in “Further Machine Learn‐
ing Resources” on page 514.

What Is Machine Learning?
Before we take a look at the details of various machine learning methods, let’s start by
looking at what machine learning is, and what it isn’t. Machine learning is often cate‐
gorized as a subfield of artificial intelligence, but I find that categorization can often
be misleading at first brush. The study of machine learning certainly arose from
research in this context, but in the data science application of machine learning meth‐
ods, it’s more helpful to think of machine learning as a means of building models of
data.
Fundamentally, machine learning involves building mathematical models to help
understand data. “Learning” enters the fray when we give these models tunable
parameters that can be adapted to observed data; in this way the program can be con‐
sidered to be “learning” from the data. Once these models have been fit to previously
seen data, they can be used to predict and understand aspects of newly observed data.
I’ll leave to the reader the more philosophical digression regarding the extent to
which this type of mathematical, model-based “learning” is similar to the “learning”
exhibited by the human brain.
Understanding the problem setting in machine learning is essential to using these
tools effectively, and so we will start with some broad categorizations of the types of
approaches we’ll discuss here.

Categories of Machine Learning
At the most fundamental level, machine learning can be categorized into two main
types: supervised learning and unsupervised learning.
Supervised learning involves somehow modeling the relationship between measured
features of data and some label associated with the data; once this model is deter‐
mined, it can be used to apply labels to new, unknown data. This is further subdivi‐
ded into classification tasks and regression tasks: in classification, the labels are
discrete categories, while in regression, the labels are continuous quantities. We will
see examples of both types of supervised learning in the following section.
Unsupervised learning involves modeling the features of a dataset without reference to
any label, and is often described as “letting the dataset speak for itself.” These models
include tasks such as clustering and dimensionality reduction. Clustering algorithms


332   |   Chapter 5: Machine Learning
